>> Being at our first peak,
Kedarnath, at the Shiva temple,
has awakened our potential
for strength but also some
of our petty comforts--
cravings, weakness, and ego.
For some people, these
shadows still lay dormant--
violence just waiting to happen.
But that's why we
come on pilgrimage--
to reveal our shadows
before their grip on us
steals the very freedom
we came here to find.
>> So there can be 10 people
present to one experience,
and they will all describe
it in their own way through
the looking glass, which has
been conditioned not only
by their history, but also
conditioned by their idea
of the future.
See, our present is
enslaved by your past
and also what you want in
the future, so life slips by.
You never live it.
Good life only happens
in the present.
And, mostly, we are
taught to use the present,
to manipulate the present--
either to escape from the past,
or somehow lead us to a
Utopian future, which only
exists as an idea in our heads.
Until there is no
inner violence within,
there's no end of violence
without because the law is--
as within so without,
not vise versa.
[CHANTING]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> This is not a
journey to feel better.
Do you understand?
You come here to transcend.
[VOCALIZING]
>> We were all told to bring
sleeping bags for the trip.
So we get to Rishikesh,
and we're getting
ready to prepare for our trip.
Anand said, you don't really
need your sleeping bags.
It's not really necessary.
>> If you want to carry
it when you go hiking,
it'll be more comfortable
up in the village.
But they have supplied
bedding for us.
>> So we probably won't need it.
>> And they left their bags
behind at the Sattva center,
and it's cold--
freezing.
And people didn't have
their sleeping bags,
and everything
feels damp and wet.
People were beside themselves.
Not just beside themselves,
but like angry and pissed
and at Anand.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The intuition said, take
it, but you said don't take it.
So I said, I'm trusting you.
I left it.
>> You trusted me, right?
So that was your choice.
I didn't ask you
to trust me, did I?
Did I ask you to trust me?
What did I say?
Tell me.
I said, you can take your
sleeping bag if you like,
but you would not need it.
I think you don't need
your sleeping bags, no.
It's your pathetic stories.
That's what I think.
Do you really need
what do you think?
Isn't that why the
conflict in our world
keeps happening
all over the world?
I've seen good people
turn violent at the turn
of circumstance.
Have you ever seen it?
People you thought
were like, oh, nothing
would happen-- poof.
Wow, where did that come from?
It can happen to any
person at any time.
It can be something else.
It's never the same
thing for everyone.
And somebody has a
trigger out of a bed,
or somebody has-- these
other triggers, you see?
We are all in magnificence
when the circumstances
are within our
familiar state, right?
But the moment you are faced
with the unfamiliar, what
comes up is terror.
And what comes for
some, is terror.
Within that terror, is blame.
Some people would
blame yourself.
Then you would project that
blame on somebody else.
It might be me if you
didn't bring a sleeping bag,
so somebody might be
blaming me right now.
[LAUGHTER]
Any person at any time--
it can be something else.
Somebody can be triggered
by something else.
It's never the same
thing for everyone.
It can happen to me.
It can happen to you.
It can happen to anyone
in a different position
at a different
circumstance in life
where we give up our power, we
play the victim, and we blame.
That's why we are even bringing
attention to it because it's
very easy to not
bring attention to it
because today is another day,
and it's beautiful, isn't it?
You are all feeling differently.
And we can just stay
here four more hours,
and then you will
feel differently.
But that's life.
Life is such.
Life never promises monotony.
Life never promises
you the known.
Life is a journey into the
unknown-- the great mystery.
And our life is marked
by events which we never
thought would happen.
Those are what define us, change
us, alter our existence, see?
Until we are not in
love with the unknown,
we are constantly threatened--
the unfamiliar, the
uncomfortable, the terrifying.
So you have to be
in the unfamiliar.
There has to be discontinue.
That's why we are here.
There's nothing wrong with
Sydney or LA or any of that,
but it's continuous.
You see, you have to
much stories and too much
familiarity there--
too much hooks
to define yourself with, to find
your safety escape mechanism.
Here, there is no place
to escape, nowhere to go.
Is it not?
Do you realize, the moment
we have an escape position,
you take it.
Is it not?
Most people, the moment that is
a-- you are in a trigger stage,
and there is an escape
route, we take it.
Most people will take that.
That's why everybody wants to
experience the [NON-ENGLISH],,
but very, very few do.
You don't have to go
out and be Mother Teresa
and convert everybody
to Christianity.
But we have to live
authentically--
every moment, and simple
moments as a little hike,
and simple moments
when you feel cold.
You have to realize that there
are people sleeping naked
on the sides of the street,
and you have a rooftop.
And if you can find
gratitude, immense gratitude
in that moment, then how are we
different than a person who's
taking a gun to shoot you
because he wants to buy food?
How are we different?
It's just that we are in
a different circumstantial
reality.
If we were put in that
circumstantial reality, who
knows what will come out of us.
Is it not?
It takes courage.
It demands absolute totality--
nothing short.
Hmm?
Wonderful.
I think the weather is
beginning to change.
We should get going.
Before that, you see
these prayer rocks.
These rocks, that's
what they symbolize
is, people's prayer, balance,
connection with the Earth.
That I'm connected with you.
Everybody, go find a place
and make a prayer pile.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Kim decided that she wanted
this to be my adventure.
She'd been here, and it
was really kind of strange
because neither one of us
makes a huge wage, you know?
So the financial thing was
really our toughest point.
She has fundraised.
She has gotten so many people,
and I cannot thank the people
of my community and at home--
just spectacular, spectacular
friends and people
that I just hardly know that
just wanted to support me.
But Kim has just
worked and worked
and worked to get me here.
And she is the reason I'm here.
Really, she is.
I love her to death.
>> Ryan and his wife, Kim,
raised money for his journey
by offering prayer flags that
Ryan would lay out at each
of the four sacred peaks.
>> There's everything from
blessing children to hoping
for better health
for parents to--
this one is my favorite-- the
universe put a light inside me.
Show me how to let it shine.
It's awesome.
Just to have them in
my hand is awesome.
>> And in the native
culture, they say,
these rocks sing the
songs of the rocks.
In the tantra where you
listen to the rocks.
I really love listening
to the mountains.
I literally-- I can
feel them speaking.
It's crazy.
All these rocks, all these
rocks have been here forever
and will be.
We shall be no more.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> When I came
down the mountain,
I found this old sheep path.
So I didn't go the path
that was made for everybody.
Then we hiked down
the waterfall,
and we crossed two rivers.
>> Whoa, whoa, whoa.
It's good, good, good.
>> In the buzz of the mountain--
that hum of that area was
so ever-present and loud.
I can hear it any time now--
very powerful, very powerful.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> We found this ladder that we
used as a bridge that we threw
across these rocks to get across
this river to get to the other
side where this
little village was.
And it was fun as hell--
fun as hell.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[NON-ENGLISH SINGING]
>> When morning comes,
we'll pack up and head out
on a 5,000-foot hike
down from Kedarnath.
But last night, Mario took
the teachings from Anand
on circumstance and
cravings, and decided
to push his comforts and
the teachings to the edge.
He went out to a small
temple and decided
to sleep with the Babas outside
in freezing temperatures.
>> I just really wanted to
challenge myself, go within,
overcome, and be a
stronger person from it.
And that I was, because
there were points
I thought I was going
to die up there.
>> I woke up to this holy
man in his bare feet praying.
And here I was.
I was wrapped in two
blankets, and he was up there
in his bare feet.
So many times on that pilgrimage
to Kedarnath was I humbled.
>> Some people will wait
a lifetime to come here
on pilgrimage.
And others, like the Babas,
will spend every day here.
That is except for the winters.
In two weeks, this
1,000-year-old temple will
hibernate as snow sets in
and blocks the path up.
What nobody, including
the riders knows
is that, in the coming spring--
just months after reopening--
a massive cloudburst
will send floods
breaking through the lake and
destroying the whole town.
The only thing remaining
is the temple of Shiva--
the temple of Kedarnath.
And I think that
the sacred nature
of these peaks and this
journey is finally starting
to set in with the riders.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> It's a pilgrimage.
It's not just a hike.
And a pilgrimage in, you
know, your ego dying.
And I can just feel
I can take home
being softer and
gentler with everybody.
And if Jeff and I come home
with more of a connection,
that will help the
whole house for sure.
>> I've always been
kind of on the outside.
I've known what meditation
and yoga is about,
but I've never
really practiced it.
And she, in the last year, has
really devoted herself to it.
And by learning
that, it's helping
me grow possibly
with her as well.
We have another bond
that we share together.
>> He's starting to learn
the things that I've believed
in for a while about meditating.
And he's listening to everybody
and picking up the vibe,
and Anand listening to
what he has to teach.
And so I think we're
getting closer together.
It's working.
The plan is working.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> You just got to release and
jump in the pool before you see
how warm it is.
That it's almost a leap
of faith, if you will,
into the unknown without
the precursor being
one of analysis.
And that's something
that is unique for me--
someone that wants to know so
much about everything that I'm
involved with, to
just let all that go,
trust it, and go forth
and dive in the pool.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> A lot of you are
tired today, so, please,
ride a bit in presence
because the fatigue is there.
>> I was tired
getting on the bikes.
I was definitely tired from
that hike and dehydrated,
but someone's on the back
and I'm on the front,
and we got to get there.
And no one wants to
die, so focus up.
And it's really great that
we come together in a huddle.
It's really helpful because
only one aspect of me is tired.
[CHANTING]
>> Ride safe.
Ride aware.
>> [INAUDIBLE] with you.
>> I don't want to sit in a car.
It's not fun.
I want to break out my
fears or just get out
of the comfort zone.
>> Aizhan got back on my bike.
So we're rotating people
on, but it was really,
really cool for her to jump back
on my bike and have the trust--
you know, because we
had fallen once before--
for her to put the trust
and have a good time with it
and enjoy hopping on.
So that was good
for both her and I.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> There's so much coming
at you so quickly like why
there's a sudden stream
of water across the road,
a tremendous number of
landslides that have transpired
as a consequence of the
monsoons themselves.
>> I don't know how many times
I was within an inch of the side
of the road and whatever--
a bus or a taxi or a Jeep
or whatever.
A little bit spooky.
A couple of times,
I'm in a spot where
it's up to the other guy what's
going to happen from here,
you know?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Anna has been riding
with me from Australia--
great teamwork together.
But I told her this
morning, let me
ride by myself for the
beginning part, see how I feel.
Something in me
just kind of wanted
to get grounded
on the bike again.
So I told her to not ride.
And, sure enough, I
come around this corner
and hit a patch of gravel.
And I go head over
the handlebars,
snapped a little bit of a
clutch and snapped the light.
But, beside that, came
out untouched, unscathed.
Any moment at any
time, you're coming
around turns with huge
trucks and sheer cliffs.
I mean, it's like if you don't
listen to your inner voice,
man--
you know?
Slow and steady
back to the mantra.
>> There really was like 45
minutes where I thought I was
going to die and really just
debated of like, oh, my God,
I want to get off this bike.
What do I do?
Do I tell him to stop,
drop me off on the side
so that Duke can come
pick me up and at?
One point, all the
kids were coming out--
little tiny, tiny kids.
So, of course, it
made me think my son.
And I'm sitting there going, do
I stay on the bike, do I now?
Tiny, tiny little kids--
I can't even imagine.
I was just thinking of how
I would feel about Narayan
walking down a
mountain like that
with a backpack that's bigger
than him and cars flying by.
It's very scary.
Not that I think anything
is going to happen,
but that moment was like, I
got to be here for my son.
>> As Carl Jung talked about,
that nothing haunts the child
more than the unlived life
of his or her parents.
And then we use the
children as an escape route.
You always make it
about the other.
Oh, it's because of my husband.
Oh, it's because of my wife
or because of my child.
The mind has this
amazing capacity
to make anything
an escape route.
Do you understand?
How can I escape from taking
absolute responsibility?
So it's because of children.
It's different
when you are alone.
But once you have
a child, everything
changes if you are
in your pain body.
For people, responsibility often
means burden, you understand?
Like kind of a burden
you were carrying.
Responsibility is
coming to your power.
the purpose of life.
It's not a burden.
Responsibility is a natural
expression of your love.
Responsibility is to
respond to what is--
to what is needed
for the evolution.
>> After a long hike down
Kedarnath and a 90-kilometer
ride through mud, the group
will get a much needed but quick
night's sleep at Rudraprayag.
From here, we'll
head to the base
camp of our next sacred
peek of freedom--
Tungnath.
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
>> Fred rises early this
morning to get some practice
on the bike, incredibly
determined to ride on his own.
>> I got to the place
riding in the SUV.
I couldn't stand it.
So I made up my mind
day before yesterday.
That's it.
I don't want to ride
in the truck anymore.
And I came up here to
ride, so I want to ride.
You know, I don't mind
a little physical pain.
I really don't.
I never have.
>> After Fred's
morning stumbles,
he still decides
to hop on the bike,
and I think we're all in awe and
admiring his absolute courage.
>> I got on the bike and
I was a little nervous.
But I kept repeating,
"I cannot fall.
I cannot fall."
And that's Anand told me.
So I kept that in my
mind, and it worked.
And I just started to
become comfortable,
and I started to get
that feeling that I
had on the bike 40 years ago.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
There were some pretty
rough spots today,
even though I had
a lot of good road.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I have a good feeling that he
knows when I should be riding
or what's going on
with me individually
in a intuitive way.
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> What did I say?
What did I say?
You're feeling it now.
You rode the whole
thing, even on the rocks?
>> Yeah, because give it the
gas, go right on through.
[APPLAUSE]
>> Yeah.
Yeah.
>> Yeah,
>> Love it!
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Going good?
>> Good feeling.
>> Yeah, you got
your confidence now.
That's good.
That's all the
difference right there.
>> Even your eyes are different.
>> Pardon me?
>> Oh, yeah?
>> Yeah, do you see it?
>> He's got the glow.
>> Yeah.
You're sparkling.
>> It seems like most
people are further along
in their spirituality than I am.
But I feel like I'm
sort of bathed in love.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I felt focused.
I felt aware.
I saw the bus, and I pulled
out of the way just in time.
But, somehow, we went down
almost right under the bus,
under the wheel.
And, thankfully,
it was "almost."
I remember Anand telling me
once that people on Indian roads
almost die all the time--
"almost."
so this accident
can make us really
afraid for the rest
of the trip, or we
could see the grace
of this "almost"
that you were somehow taken care
of, and we could focus on that.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> [INAUDIBLE].
>> Anand and I are standing
in and we're just talking,
and he starts laughing
his little funny laugh.
And he goes, yeah, yeah, yeah.
I had the sleeping
bags brought, so we all
have the sleeping bags.
They all needed to go through
what they needed to go through.
But I brought the
bags back for them.
And he had that little
wicked laugh that he does.
And I just laughed
as well and thought,
everyone's going to be so happy.
>> Here are your sleeping bags.
>> Where is my sleeping bag?
>> Which one is
yours that you left?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Tomorrow we rise incredibly
early for the ascent
to Tungnath.
This will be a straight up
hike to reach the first temple
at 12,000 feet,
then a second ascent
to reach the smaller but
higher temple at 13,000
feet on a crescent-shaped peak.
The earlier we
arrive, the better
the chance of seeing the whole
Himalayan range before all
the clouds start to roll in.
It's a grueling hike
for an unknown reward
and not all will
muster the will for.
>> Freedom from self above all--
freedom from self because we
are the one who hold our self
bondage.
See, that's what this
journey is about.
It's what we think we
need, what we think we are,
what we think happened
to us in the past,
how it should have been, what
we think we need in the future,
how we should be treated,
and all of those things--
small conditioned stories.
Freedom from self equates to
freedom from circumstance,
you see?
Then you are not
fighting anymore.
You are in love.
You are with the universe.
You are with this planet.
You realize that you are the
whole in this very moment.
The whole is
listening through us.
The whole is experiencing
through us right now.
Effortlessly, we are present.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> For some reason, when
I hit about 10,000 feet,
it really started you know--
every 100, 200 yards I just
stop and catch more breath.
>> I don't want to hurry you but
I might have to just a little
bit.
>> And I start to get what
people talk about when they say
you've got to come to India
and experience the Himalayas
and their power.
[MUSIC PLAYING]